[Music]
it is great to be here I love San
Francisco I was born here and it's it
really is my favorite city I'm glad to
be back haven't lived here for a long
time so SETI Institute artisan residence
program I was the beta test and I'll
tell you a little bit about that top
left images at NASA Ames quite near here
it's their data visualization Center and
that's an image a pixel accurate image
of an area of the night sky as big as
your fingernail and your pinky when held
at arm's length so they're doing that
there's a floor size supercomputer
running this screen on the right is the
Allen telescope array that's where SETI
listens for alien signals that's up near
the Oregon border bottom right is Kepler
data so that's exoplanets in front of
other Suns and on the left is the the
world's biggest wind tunnel and I got
that to myself for three days a couple
years ago to do an audio experiment and
actually brought sounds from the Costa
Rican rainforest into that space and I
was just thinking about the experience
of sound in a space where there was no
biodiversity these are recordings from
one of the most biodiverse places on
earth I used it as an acoustic space I
didn't have 300 mile an hour winds going
through it at the time the the SETI
Institute artists and residents program
those opportunities came about because
Jill tarter one of the great women
scientists of our time famous Astro
scientists saw this work of mine which
is called carbon it's a mixture of
photography and really kind of
microscopic drawing it's really the
illusion of scientific imagery with a
sort of a kind of a high-resolution
truth that it portrays even though it's
it's really totally a fiction anyway
that program I beta tested and now it's
going on to have a number of artists and
it's evolving I'm not going to talk
about that program so much now but it's
moving in very interesting ways the
setting suit has about 80 full-time
Astro scientists right across the
spectrum and our programs putting
basically mid-career our
just specific artists with top
scientists and it's been going very well
so really interesting program I'm going
to back up into something else here and
sort of tie this in I studied
exploration geology and that was my
first field station in the Canadian
Arctic Northwest Territories early 80's
and that is a helicopter accident that I
was involved in I was 20 and lived but
it was a true near-death experience and
I've been returning to it recently do
something I don't know if it's a little
bit weird but how many people in here
have have really had a near-death and
there's no two ways about it you know it
scares it scares you I mean it's a few
people I don't know how many people get
it you just you get this clarity you
just this this sense of what's important
and what isn't and it's I think it's a
very important experience I mean
psychedelics can deliver it in a manner
of speaking there's were there ways to
simulate it I've had a few in my life
but that one was profound and it really
kicked me off and and something that I
wouldn't have talked about in the
lecture before last November is that you
know I think our democracy is had a
near-death experience and the election
felt like that and now the thing with
the near-death experiences it happens in
a few seconds and that intensity is
concentrated now this thing is like
spreading out and we're kind of getting
used to things but the whole system that
has allowed me and I'm going to guess
most of us in here to you know to live
one the Holocene a very we've been
through a period centuries of relatively
calm weather on earth and now we have
this incredible political challenge so I
don't think of my work is political but
I don't know if we can talk about some
of the things you know environmentally
which is what I'm really into without
going a little bit political anyway this
is you know I'm a big outdoors guy I
like to be out in nature and this is on
the coast of British Columbia actually
witnessed and photographed this thing
where a wolf pulled an otter out of the
surf my approach ended up in the otter
being released and I kind of live for
these things that you can't really plan
I was actually audio recording when the
event happened so I did this geology
work and sort of quickly became a
photographer and I headed out
and this is early 80s to see the I was
really interested in hunting cultures
and I was very interested because what I
really wanted to know was how they
perceived nature and even in the 80s
were very very few left on earth I mean
I knew that much and so I happen to get
involved with a shaman in a single clan
or an island west of Sumatra mento I
chain it sort of got known for surfing
since this was long before then and I
end up spending two months every winter
for eight years out there it's just it's
just a little bit of a background on
this relationship with nature and you
know I'll bring it forward so I did that
for eight years and then that was my
first book and then after that I spent a
couple years on this turtle work so this
was a very interesting thing I learned
about in Indonesia and that is the
turtle which is the foundation of the
balinese hindu religion was being
captured all over bali green turtles for
live sacrifices chinese indonesian
merchants organizing what were
effectively poor Muslim serfs to go out
to capture these Turtles live all over
the archipelago and bring them back for
these sacrifices super complex really
weird and environmentally very
challenging so I put myself into that I
really became a photojournalist working
in the environmental realm I had my
friends were some of the top war
photojournalist the war I was interested
in was the environment so fast-forward a
bunch I mean from that like pretty much
20 plus years this is from an
installation that was at MASS MoCA this
past year it's now traveling and it's
called the field station and and inside
of this it morphs architectural II to
contain various works that I'm making
it's now the Des Moines Art Center just
coming down today and then it's going to
the Akron Museum
so the facade that I'm using here are
cases that I got on eBay and these took
replacement transfer cases to
Afghanistan so a Hummer gets you know
popped from underneath by a by roadside
bomb they have to replace the
transmission so these cases it all gone
to Afghanistan come back and I salvaged
them I'm a bit of a Bay and also
physical salvager so I found these
things and I was I was looking both for
in a sense call it frames for work and I
got a whole bunch of them and then I I
went to somebody that had bought them
from the Navy near Massachusetts and I
went into his space and I saw them as
like Legos as architectural pieces now
in building artworks in them but also
physically building these things I
bought a lot of them that's just a
little bit it was it well you know
anyway so I'm going to I'm looping in
back to SETI so this is dr. Lawrence
Doyle one of the great scientists of our
time and he's the scientist that I ended
up pairing with through this incredible
opportunity at the SETI Institute among
many other things when Lawrence right
now is working on quantum astronomy
speed of light experiments but he wrote
the algorithms that determined humpback
whale communications exhibit syntax very
strongly inferring its language you know
it's science so you don't say its
language till you know so I opportunity
to work with him and I thought one this
is like incredible information why is
this not front page these as he would
say these are the aliens you would also
say if we can't you know talk to these
life-forms highly intelligent life-forms
that share our own biochemistry what are
we thinking we're going to do when the
real aliens show up so this is a we have
audio straight up
[Laughter]
ah
Oh
that that's not moving
you know that's complicated stuff this
is the last operational Morse code
facility in the US it's at Bolinas easy
drive from here and by the way every
Saturday it's open for tours so these
retired engineers keep it operating at
its you know in its World War two ground
EUR and it's really excellent hiking out
there so if you haven't been out I
highly suggest it anyway the same point
that I started working with Lawrence I
got offered the sound installation
working with them was 100th anniversary
of Marconi and so these engineers
transmitted and received two messages
basically pros for me one is what are
the whales saying the other is all we
need is love this is what so I took that
I dropped into Ableton Live a sound
software for those who don't know and
converted it to MIDI which I use them to
drive software samplers with some other
samples whales surf so that the sound
and the sound installation that my
messages are literally integrated in it
and therefore this idea like we you know
we all love to listen to the surf at the
water's edge and what if you what if
there was more information in there I
mean this is getting into this is art
this isn't science
[Music]
so that was the there was the result of
that process and very interesting aspect
that I was really interested what
Lawrence would say when he came into the
installation and he spent time and it
was very very interesting man I mean he
spent a lot of time with the Navajo I've
been with that with the Mentawai and
Indonesia we had a lot of crossover and
and he came out of that and he just goes
spontaneous comprehension that's what
art can deliver that science doesn't and
that was a really important moment
because it's sort of I could put this
succinct idea on what the program was
trying to do this is another piece it's
called the rocket brain and and the
foundation of it above that deck is a
missile guidance system that I found on
eBay and I and I got it and started
looking at the tags that was made for
NASA in the 70s so I brought it back to
life in a manner of speaking
I'm also teen motion ASEC it's in a show
at haasvelt gallery here in the city
that opens tomorrow it's called garage
inventors a group show that I'm really
happy to be and there's something very
interesting artists in it so this is a
[Applause]
so just to give you some other concepts
with the rocket brain it has a proximity
sensor and so depending on the viewers
proximity it affects the spin rate of
the gyro and it does it in it's coated
with some randomization so you
understand and this is this is come to
point of this is you understand that the
device is aware it's being viewed and so
I'm really interested in that as an idea
that the art under you know is sending
you that message that little nugget is
is sort of enough when I first started
using sensors I was doing everything
possible and it was it was like sort
like cooking with too many spices and
then I sort of brought it down to just a
couple this is a piece that I built at
Rauschenberg residency and without going
deep because I'm going to stay on time I
dreamt this and sketched it after
finding a horseshoe crab in the
mangroves down there and then ended up
building a sort of an interesting
process so horseshoe crab 450 million
years on earth I'm really interested in
big timeframes I mean there was geology
of course there's astronomy with SETI so
they're a living dinosaur and I end up
covering them in gold and one of the
things with gold is it's used a lot in
aerospace I mean we all know the blimp
you know the bling quality we see it in
archaeological sites but gold was
created in stars that died before ours
was born gold was created in supernovae
and so you know gold if you have it in
jewelry I mean it is this direct
connection and as humans and I'll you
know get back to this again with it with
environmentalism you know we're really
not set up to understand those
timeframes and I'm not going to tell you
that I do but I think it's an
interesting way to approach it
so just because I'm going to run a
little video of what this actually does
there are lights under each of these
crabs in this wacky device and I coded I
worked with a friend to code basically
like you would design a drum machine a
seven voice drum machine there's seven
crabs except instead of sound it's light
so it's sort of like it's like a song
for a synesthete and and then the coding
was done so that
the songs never the same twice it varies
between 30 seconds and two minutes
there's a gap in between it starts with
a pulse as a harmony complicates and
dies off any longer sort of like
predator moves underneath so also in
this show you know come out of this
photojournalism background I started
really doing screen grabs almost as a
photojournalist and and you know so here
I'm going from like these thinking about
these big time frames to what's
happening right now so and then I'll and
these are some of these art pieces that
I'm building in these cases so the
screen grab on the Left December 30th
2015 the North Pole was two degrees
Fahrenheit 50 above normal that day I
thought this is friggin crazy I just did
a screen grab on the right side is you
know I was looking to trade in my phone
and at the moment that I realized I
couldn't tell if I was communicating
with AI or somebody in the Philippines I
thought this is really significant I
mean I'm really interested in evolution
and when you're thinking about evolution
you've got to be thinking about what's
going on with AI machine intelligence so
I've started sort of grabbing these
things are just very very specific
moments of the now this is the field
station other iteration in Des Moines
the other thing I started bringing in is
on the right is that it's probably an
18th century door it's from the
afghan-pakistan border and it's probably
from a Himalayan mosque hard to know on
the back I took this biologic
synthesizer and you'll notice that a lot
of these works have countdown clocks
I'll tell you about that a little bit
it's suspended its massive and it's
suspended underneath it has a real-time
surveillance fisheye camera that's
what's feeding the video on the top so
when the viewer moves around it they
actually end up seeing themselves or
they see other viewers and this is these
are these are paces you know it's rough
in the format of a paint
right it's a rectangle but this is this
aluminum work I'm doing and those works
all started around these emo that red
button that's in the middle and I
actually there's a salvage yard in
Milpitas that I like to go to I get in
big trouble at and and I bought a whole
bunch of these emergency off buttons
that's the e mo and then the next day I
was in NASA Ames in the Mars labs and
the equipment the roundest had that
exact one by that exact manufacturing
note sorta like of your sleeve gets
caught you're supposed to go like that
so that you don't lose your arm and so
I've been building this work you know
it's emo it's sort of like an emu that's
in that image
whatever this is the wackiness one of
the things that I really like in the
museum is that people can't stop
themselves from going up and hittin the
button like which drives the guards not
I don't care if people touch they are
actually like when people touch the argh
and it's a total sidebar but I'm melting
them and I'm doing some work at Bell
Labs and people they're working with
neuroscience there say you know they've
been doing fMRI with with touch and
without and stuff and the you know the
degree of literal contact emotional
contact with anything you can touch them
it's why we touch people when we're
talking to them or not is incredible so
I think you know to have an artwork and
museums full of art that you can't touch
is you know it's kind of a diminished
experience so I always encourage people
to touch but the guards get a bill you
know a little bit itchy on that on the
right is a robotic arm piece actually
the top half of it I sell it there's a
salvage sale in Cupertino every I think
it's every second I'm given all my
secrets away every second Saturday you
know you get all these engineers at dawn
selling the most amazing junk and and
then on the left I had I was in Budapest
couple years ago at st. Stephen's
Cathedral and st. Stephens arm is is in
a reliquary and it's he performed a
miracle in 1088 I think it was and
supposedly his arm never that he did the
miracle with never decayed so it was in
there so again I had another one of my
dreams
i friggin dreamed this thing it's
ridiculous and then I came back to LA
like ten days later my friend introduced
me to somebody that had just done a 3d
scan of Jim Carrey's arm for one of the
moon
and I'm like to chew my arm they're like
acid and we're doing your arm so they 3d
scanned it and then i took the scan to
nasa and to the 3d lab and they had a
brand new printer and so they printed
that one-to-one very high-resolution
took two days to print so sort of it's
really one of the first figurative
pieces i've done and then it's gold
electroplated and i put it in the in
this glass what's called a bottle these
things are actually made to hold the the
antenna guts at the Allen telescope
array where SETI listens for alien
signals that one came out of spec so
they gave it to me and then that printer
that today has been printing for the
International Space Station ever since
so this is I had that arm and and this
is all part of the SETI access to NASA
Ames which has been unbelievable and so
I requested permission to put some
artworks in the fluid mechanics tanks
where this is the tank where they tested
the first models of the space shuttle I
thought that's pretty cool to put art
objects in a tank and look for the
turbulence and vortices that around our
why they let me do that I have no idea
but anyway this is pretty interesting
one of the reasons they did it and all
joking aside one of things I've loved
about NASA is the humor there is
incredible
I mean I've hardly met a scientist there
that I mean they may have off-color
humor you know I grew up mostly in
Canada there's Canadian humor but but
there's a lot of humor there and they're
really interested in having artists
around you know some Laurie Anderson did
something in there and 9s kind of famous
event and then some right-wing dude in
Washington said no you know he was
pissed off but what she didn't said no
artists will be in NASA period so we're
kind of doing these workarounds but but
people really like to have an artist
around because we you know that's this
idea of asking questions of the
engineers that the other engineers
aren't asking so it's yeah it's very
interesting this is called a sputter er
this is used in brilliant particle
physics and I salvaged this out of
Taiwan and made one of my whacky devices
out of it so one of the things that
you've seen a number of the works
is these countdown clocks so I ended up
making clocks friend of mine does coding
jack collars some of you will know him
he was at pier 9 for a while
he helped me code them so 12 digit
countdown clocks and with toes I chose
the rate of change
aesthetically so that's sort of
interesting things because means I'm
deciding how fast time goes and then we
did the math on the twelve digits and it
turns out thirty-one years to loop so
I'm not going to tell you what the
thirty-one years is I don't know if it's
the Ice Age or you know its how long
until you know both mankind gets their
water dosed or something like that but
anyway I've been building these
countdown clocks I think it's sort of
curious okay I'm going to jump here part
two I'm close to 20 minutes I'm going to
move fast on this Pacific coast of Costa
Rica just above the Panamanian border is
the OSA Peninsula this is considered
second most biodiverse place not largest
but most biodiverse
freaky biodiversity that's my wife the
artist Catherine Chalmers she's been
working with leaf cutter ants which are
considered the most advanced social
species outside of humans they are
master chemists they wage organized
warfare they are agriculturalists they
don't eat what they pick they grow
mushrooms on them they are amazing
colonies of 808 million members with no
central command so they're very
interesting when thinking about how
networks work anyway she's been working
on mainly video work down there for
eight years I do or soundtracks and I'm
a field recording freak so I've been
going off in the rain forest these are
some of the wildlife and I'm not even
concentrating on photography mainly
sound but it is so rich that's another
otter on the right there
sloth snake of course so one of the
things that I do it's I'm is truly wild
with cats and tape years and it's very
snaky and so what I do is I go out and I
find an area where I want to record and
I rake an area big enough to put a tarp
down I set up my mics and then I'll go
back like in the dark at 4:00 in the
morning wait for dawn you know as it
warms and all the sounds come up I go it
in the middle of the day I go in the
evening in the dark and then I go in the
middle of the night
and then I move these things around so I
built up this library it's really driven
aesthetically not not sort of like an
ornithologist or something and I found
it really really stimulating and and I'm
it's almost a whole nother conversation
there's a whole field of ethnomusicology
that's looked at rhythm as it's
developed from listening to poly rhythms
in insects sort of accidental poly
rhythms and and so the stimulation of
sitting there you know you have many
species so it is answering tradition you
have another one's attention to it and
that's answering and it sort of sinks
and then doesn't and and you it is
extremely stimulating slide this idea
how could I bring that to the world not
just for environmental protection but
also just as pleasure but ultimately it
is about protection too so this is a
real tree down there that's a CG
platform and I was part of a some you
may have seen this online but I had this
idea to bring real-time sound had the
data related to climate seismic data and
video to the web the trailers been on
Vimeo for about two years and then this
time last year I got invited to Bell
Labs Bell Labs at a program 1966 to 1970
called Eata experiment snorting
technology last year's 50th anniversary
and they invited some artists out there
to look at reviving it nokia now owns
Bell Labs they're financially stable or
better
and so they saw this and the long and
short is that this is being developed by
Bell Labs public announcement is
hopefully in June were closed so this is
really exciting this this is this
program so this means that we're we're
actually building it so that it'll be
about seven pickup points I'm working
with OC conservation that have a piece
of land adjacent to the great National
Park Corcovado goes from very rugged
beach where turtles lay up through
wetlands and then up into primary
forests so we'll have sensors and mics
in canopies and we're going to build one
deck most of the pickup points don't you
know you climb to them but so this thing
is happening it also means that you know
if you imagine any school anywhere in
the world with Internet is going to be
able to listen we're going to have you
know really good software interface and
then on the back end this is this is
just a sketch for scale but I'm
developing the ecotone which is going to
be a really ambitious sound project and
one of the reasons Bell's interested
both on the acquisition and in the rain
forest and at this level is because
we're developing new technologies and
again it's this area where an artist
comes in says can we do this they say no
and I say why not and then you know they
kind of go to work so there's going to
be a lot of things sort of recognizing
where you are through heat sensors I
mean at San Francisco everybody here
kind of knows what's going on with with
sensors but we're going to try and take
that to a really high level and I want
this thing actually to be you know
really intentionally quite synthetic but
you know I'll also hope obviously that
it's in the service of the environment
because this whole thing we have going
on right now with climate change denial
I mean in sexism requires cowardice and
as does bigotry and racism requires
cowardice but it's not treason and I
wonder when we call climate change
denial treason I mean I think we need to
start thinking that way so that's it
thank you
[Applause]